Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about something
that might sound improbable:
Swedish teenage gangsters.
Over the past decade, Sweden has
seen a rise in violent crime, with an
increasing amount committed by children.
And in this episode, we’ll explore
why this is, whether it is as great a
problem as some have made it out to be,
and what the country is doing about it.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
Let me start this episode
by painting you a picture.
This isn’t an invented story;
it’s true, it’s something that
happened to me just a few weeks ago.
It was around 6 o’clock in the afternoon.
I had picked up my kids from their
respective schools, and we’d been
playing in the park with friends.
Football, swings, hide and seek.
On the way back home, one of my sons
heard a helicopter flying overhead.
He’d seen a helicopter before, but
for this two-year-old, it was a
pretty exciting sight for an otherwise
uneventful Wednesday afternoon.
It seemed to be hovering over our
heads, but after finally managing to
persuade him to wave goodbye to it,
we set off on the short journey home.
I didn’t think much more of it,
but as we were eating dinner
an hour or so afterwards, my
son pointed out of the window.
The helicopter was still there, circling.
I had my suspicions about what
this might mean, but I invented
some excuse: perhaps someone had
lost their teddy bear or something.
After they had got to bed, I checked the
news, and my suspicions were confirmed.
Just around the time we had
finished in the playground, a
member of the public had made a
grim discovery in a nearby car park.
The lifeless bodies of two men.
The police had been called, the area
cordoned off, and the helicopters were
not searching for a child’s lost teddy
bear, but for a murderer, a murderer who
may very well have been a child themself.
Now, as of the time of recording this
episode, the police haven’t released
any further information about the case.
They immediately announced that they
suspected it was part of an ongoing turf
war between feuding gangs in the north
of the city, the city of Gothenburg,
the second largest city in Sweden.
The two men were well-known to
the authorities, the police said.
Nevertheless, the case was shocking.
The area where they were found
is a leafy, residential, and safe
area; it’s not gang territory.
The dead men had been left in a
parked car in the car park of a
neighbourhood supermarket, right next
to a football club where hundreds
of children were happily practising.
It was shocking to me because I live just
a few hundred metres away; my nearest
supermarket, a place I often pass through
with my kids, is that very supermarket.
But to the Swedish police,
unfortunately, this has become
somewhat of a regular occurrence.
In 2022, there were 391 recorded
shootings - more than one a day.
It’s not just guns; that same year,
there were 149 recorded explosions,
with everything from grenades being
thrown through apartment windows to
bombs being planted behind doors.
And let’s remember, Sweden is
a small country, a country of
just over 10 million people.
What this has meant is that it now has
the grim title of the second-highest
gun crime rate in Europe, with the
per capita murder rate in Stockholm
an astounding 30 times that of London.
And to make matters even scarier,
the perpetrators of this violence
are not always grown men, seasoned
criminals who have spent more
time inside prison than out.
They are often teenagers, young boys.
Indeed, in 2022, almost half the
suspects in gun-related murders
were between the ages of 15 and 20.
And shockingly, sometimes
they are even younger.
In early October, six people were
shot in a town north of Stockholm.
The shooter, according to
police, was only 13 years old.
So, what’s going on?
To most people, the image they have
of Sweden is one of beautiful lakes,
stylish men and women with great
hair and flawless English, IKEA
furniture, not of violence and murder.
Well, like any complex problem,
there are differing viewpoints on the
causes and, therefore, the solutions.
What is unfortunately undeniable is
that the situation is out of hand.
Gun-related violence has been
rising in Sweden over the past
20 years or so, bucking the trend
of every other European country.
Some years it has come down, and indeed
it has come down slightly since 2022,
but the overall trend is upwards.
And the age of the perpetrators, those
pulling the triggers, planting the
bombs and throwing the grenades, has
unfortunately been trending downwards;
the killers have been getting younger.
According to Brå, which is the Swedish
National Council for Crime Prevention,
there are several factors behind this.
Firstly, the makeup of criminal
gangs in Sweden has changed.
Historically, they were more hierarchical,
with a big boss controlling large
parts of an area’s criminal activity.
Starting in the early 2010s, however, it's
become more regional, with smaller, more
local gangs that exerted tighter control
especially over an area’s drug market.
These gangs also became more willing
to use violence, and in particular,
lethal force to resolve disputes.
Previously, resorting to murder was
a serious affair that might require
approval from the upper echelons of
the organisation; with smaller, more
fragmented groups, lethal force often
became the primary way to resolve a
conflict, even ones that might previously
have been resolved in non-violent ways,
or at least, with non-lethal force.
And from this emerged a new type
of criminal: the teenage killer.
To quote directly the Swedish National
Council for Crime Prevention, “These
individuals did not always have strong
personal stakes in the disputes but were
often recruited to carry out violent
acts, driven by the promise of status
and money. Compared to previous periods,
there seems to have been a devaluation
in the status of executing certain types
of shootings, with younger individuals
with limited experience from the
criminal milieu taking in these tasks.”
End quote.
In other words, these young people, boys
mainly, would carry out contracts on
behalf of gangs, killing members of rival
gangs, or even their families, for cash.
In interviews, young people are
often very open about what is offered
to them, usually coming through
encrypted messaging apps and even
social media: €5,000 for shooting
someone in the leg, €15,000 to kill.
The offer is placed, a job accepted,
and the child is then given the
name and details of the target, and
provided with a weapon to commit the
deed, often with an apparent complete
indifference to its consequences.
In the case of the 13-year-old
suspected of having shot six people
in early October, his social worker
had asked him where he was, because
they suspected he might have got
involved in the wrong circles.
And he reportedly texted back
with “check the news, hehe”.
Now, why are kids getting
drawn into the world of crime?
Well, the primary motivation
seems to be financial.
Criminal gangs are not only offering
large amounts of money, but also
posting on social media about what
this money brings: cars, designer
clothes, and the latest electronics.
And most of these teenage
criminals are coming from worlds
where this seems out of reach.
Although the Swedish police doesn’t
release statistics on the backgrounds
of those charged with or suspected of
crime–especially minors–the trend is
that these children typically come from
second-generation immigrant backgrounds,
often with parents on low incomes.
To these children, entering the
criminal world offers an easy ticket to
riches, one job, just an hour’s work,
and you can get paid more than your
entire family might make in a year.
It is, on one level, unsurprising
that someone in such a situation
might be tempted by such an offer.
But this is not a uniquely Swedish
situation; the world over, criminal
gangs use children to carry out tasks
for them, from carrying drugs to
hiding weapons, and the offer of quick
and easy money is as attractive to
a boy in Stockholm as in São Paulo.
So, what’s different about Sweden?
Well, according to some commentators, this
is a problem deeply linked to immigration.
Until fairly recently, Sweden had
a very generous immigration policy,
and hundreds of thousands of people
immigrated to the country, often
from countries ravaged by war.
Integrating these immigrants has not been
easy, and there is no Swedish politician,
to my knowledge, who says integration has
been a resounding success; on the left,
politicians admit that there is still
a lot of work to do, and on the right,
especially the further right, there are
those who wish to paint immigrants as
the source of all Sweden’s problems.
On one level, life as an immigrant is
easier in Sweden than in most countries.
The state provides you with free
healthcare, childcare, school and
university, benefits if you are unable
to find work, and housing if you need it.
Unlike some countries, in Sweden,
nobody should ever be forced
to live in abject poverty, as
the state will provide for you.
But many immigrants report feeling that
they are treated as second-class citizens.
They live in ghettoised areas where
few people speak Swedish, so they have
limited chance to learn the language.
They cannot find work, and do not
feel like this will ever change.
And it is these people’s children,
typically, children who were born in
Sweden, but to immigrant parents, who tend
to be the ones picking up the weapons.
They see their parents, uncles, aunties,
and cousins, and don’t see any way out.
This makes them easy
targets for criminals.
But, again, this is not a
uniquely Swedish problem.
Many other European countries have
similar levels of immigration, similar
problems with integration, and haven’t
seen a consequent rise in gun violence.
So, yes, it may be a factor, but we
need to look at what else there may be.
One thing that is more unique to Sweden
is that it has a particularly forgiving
justice system when it comes to children.
Of course, in most countries, children
are treated differently from adults,
but Sweden is particularly lenient:
children under the age of 15 cannot be
tried in court, no matter what they do.
Even between the ages of 15 and 17, prison
is seen as an absolute last resort, and
they are usually sent to social services.
And it doesn’t stop there.
Even if you’re 19 or 20, so legally
an adult in most countries, the
courts are still required to
treat you as a “young person”.
This means lighter sentences,
no life imprisonment, and
often, rehabilitation programmes
instead of standard prison time.
The idea behind all of this is
simple, and in many ways admirable.
The Swedish justice system believes that
young people can change, that criminal
behaviour as a child is often a sign of
social problems, not of inherent evil.
Poverty, unstable families, poor
schooling, these aren’t a child’s
fault, and it is these that push a child
towards crime, so the argument goes.
So the role of the state is to
rehabilitate, not to punish.
But there’s a problem.
This lenient and forgiving system was
designed for the occasional teenage
troublemaker: the boy who steals a
bike or gets into fights at school.
It wasn’t designed for a
generation of teenage hitmen.
And gangs have quickly figured out
that these lenient laws are a gift.
They recruit children under the age
of 15 precisely because they know
those children cannot go to prison,
so the children have less to fear.
They’ll be back on the street
within days, if not hours.
For gang leaders, that makes these
boys the perfect soldiers: disposable,
fearless, and legally, almost untouchable.
And so, a system built on compassion
has become, unintentionally,
a tool for exploitation.
And there is another factor too,
linked to immigration, but indirectly:
after the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s,
Sweden welcomed tens of thousands
of refugees from the Balkans.
These were people fleeing brutal conflicts
in Bosnia, Croatia, Serbia, and Kosovo,
wars that had torn apart families,
communities, and entire countries.
Sweden opened its doors, as it
has always done, and offered
safety, housing, and the chance for
refugees to rebuild their lives.
But among the refugees were a minority
of former soldiers, militia members, and
people with links to organised crime.
And after the war, the Balkan region
was flooded with small arms, such as
pistols, grenades, and automatic weapons.
By some estimates, millions
of unregistered weapons were
circulating in the Balkans in
the years after the conflict.
In cupboards, in wardrobes, under the bed.
And in the following decades, many of
them would make their way into Sweden.
And they still do, with one estimate
suggesting that three new weapons arrive
in Sweden every single day, and police
often tracing the origins of firearms
used in shootings back to the Balkans.
This is a key reason why there
are so many weapons in Sweden,
compared to other Nordic countries.
So, you have this array of different
factors: an increasingly segmented
criminal world willing to use lethal
force, a pool of willing children,
a lack of economic opportunities, a
justice system based on rehabilitation
rather than punishment, and enough
weapons to form a small army.
And the result, well, unfortunately, you
can open the front page of any Swedish
newspaper and see it almost every day.
The question now is what to do about it.
And this, as you might imagine,
is the subject of great debate.
Some believe the answer lies
in getting tougher on crime.
The Swedish government, which has
shifted to the right after 2022, has
promised what it calls “a paradigm shift”
in how the country deals with crime.
The Prime Minister has spoken about
“breaking the gangs’ backs”, and his
government has already introduced
a series of measures that mark
a sharp turn away from Sweden’s
traditionally liberal approach.
Among the most controversial
proposals is to lower the age
of criminal responsibility.
Under the current law, as you
heard, anyone under the age of
15 cannot be tried or sentenced.
But under new proposals, prosecutors
would be able to charge younger offenders
for serious crimes, such as murder,
attempted murder, or bombings, with
some in government pushing for children
as young as 13 to be tried as adults
The government has also introduced
harsher penalties for crimes connected
to gang networks, meaning that even
being part of a criminal organisation
could carry longer sentences.
Police have also been given broader
powers to intercept encrypted messages,
use facial recognition technology, and
conduct preventive searches, which allow
them to stop and search people even if
they’re not suspected of a specific crime.
Now, critics say these measures
have gone too far; they are the sort
of things more commonly associated
with countries like France or the
UK, not famously liberal Sweden.
The government, however, argues that
the situation demands it; desperate
times call for desperate measures.
Sweden’s liberal justice system isn’t
adequately equipped to deal with the
level of criminality that exists today.
This isn’t the time for philosophical
debate about rehabilitation,
so the argument goes; it’s
a fight to restore order.
But there is, of course, another camp.
Many Swedes believe that these
measures may address the symptoms of
the violence, but not the root cause.
Harsher punishments and police powers
might make voters feel safer in the
short term and put a bunch of young
men behind bars, but in the long term,
they aren’t really solving anything.
Instead, they call for greater investment
in schools, housing, and integration.
In other words, tackling the reasons
why these children end up in gangs in
the first place, not punishing them
after they’ve pulled the trigger.
Using the carrot, not the stick.
Now, the one thing I want to
add here is my own perspective.
I live in Sweden, and I often see
scaremongering stories by foreign
media outlets, often right-leaning
ones, portraying the country as some
extremely dangerous, crime-filled
warzone, with immigrants as the culprits.
Yes, it is frightening to think
that this is happening close
to where my family lives, and I
certainly wish it were different.
But this violence is predominantly gang
on gang, and my experience so far is
that cities in Sweden feel much safer
than places like London or Paris.
And pinning all of the blame on
immigration is, in my opinion, a gross
simplification of a complicated problem.
To wrap things up, Sweden is
a wonderful place, but it’s
neither the socialist utopia nor
hellhole it’s painted out to be.
And, no matter their political persuasion,
everyone in Sweden wants to return to
a situation where shootings are not a
daily occurrence, but the question of
how to get there is far from resolved.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Sweden’s Teenage Gangsters.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Are you from Sweden, or
have you visited Sweden?
What are your thoughts on the
issue, the root causes, and
what can be done about it?
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.